# **Data Engineering Nanodegree**
## **1. Data Modeling**
### **1.1 Introduction to Data Modeling**
---
#### **Relational databases**
- Relational model: organizes data into tables (relations) of columns and rows.
- SQL (structured query language): language used across almost all relational database system for querying and mantaining databases.
- Common types of relational databases (order of enterprise production readiness):
  - Oracle: used by almost enterprise as their system of truth that handles asses transactions;
  - Teradata;
  - MySql;
  - PostgreSQL;
  - Sqlite: database in file format, generally used in development of extremely simple tasks in an application.
- Database/schema: collection of tables.

#### **When to use a relational database?**
- Flexibility for writing in SQL queries
- Modeling the data not modeling queries
- Ability to do joins, aggregations and analytics
- Secondary Indexes available: it is possible to add another index to help with quick searching
- Smaller data volumes: If you have a smaller data volume (and not big data) you can use a relational database for its simplicity.
- ACID Transactions: Allows you to meet a set of properties of database transactions intended to guarantee validity even in the event of errors, power failures, and thus maintain data integrity.
- Easier to change to business requirements

#### **ACID Transactions**
- Properties of database transactions intended to guarantee validity even in the event of errors or power failures:
  - Atomicity: the whole transaction is processed or nothing is processed.
  - Consistency: only transactions that abide by constraints and rules are written into the database, otherwise the database keeps the previous state.
  - Isolation: transactions are processed independently and securely, order does not matter.
  - Durability: completed transactions are saved to database even in cases of system failure.

#### **When not to use a relational database?**
- **Have large amounts of data**: they are are not distributed databases and can only scale vertically by adding more storage in the machine itself. You are limited by how much you can scale and how much data you can store on one machine. You cannot add more machines like you can in NoSQL databases.
- **Need to be able to store different data type formats**: Relational databases are not designed to handle unstructured data.
- **Need high throughput -- fast reads**: while ACID transactions bring benefits, they also slow down the process of reading and writing data. If you need very fast reads and writes, using a relational database may not suit your needs.
- **Need a flexible schema**: flexible schema can allow for columns to be added that do not have to be used by every row, saving disk space.
- **Need high availability**: the fact that relational databases are not distributed (and even when they are, they have a coordinator/worker architecture), they have a single point of failure. When that database goes down, a fail-over to a backup system occurs and takes time.
- **Need horizontal scalability**: horizontal scalability is the ability to add more machines or nodes to a system to increase performance and space for data.

#### **PostgreSQL**
- Open source object-relational database system
- Uses and builds on SQL language

#### **NoSQL Database**
- Simpler design, simples horizontal scaling, and finer control of availability.
- Operations are faster.
- Various types:
  - Apache Cassandra (partition row store): data organized in columns and rows format.
  - MongoDB (document store): in addition to the key lookups performed by key-value store, the database also offers an API or query language that retrieves document based on its contents. Basically easy to do search on documents.
  - DynameDB (key-value store): data is represented as a collection of key and value pairs.
  - Apache HBase (wide columns store): it also uses tables, rows and columns, but unlike a relational database, the names and formats of the columns can vary from row to row in the same table.
  - Neo4j (graph database): relationships between entities is more the focus. Data is represented as nodes and edges.

#### **Apache Cassandra**
- Terminology:
  - Keyspace = collection of tables
  - Table = group of partitions
  - Rows = a single item
  - Partition = fundamental unit of access, collection of rows, how data is distributed
  - Primary key = made up of a partition key and clustering columns
  - Columns = clustering columns and data columns
- **Provides scalability** and **high availability** without compromising performance. Linear scalability and proven **fault-tolerance** on commodity hardware or cloud infrastructure make it the perfect platform for mission-critical data.
- Uses its own query language CQL.
- Use cases:
  - Transaction logging (retail, health care)
  - Internet of Things (IoT)
  - Time series data
  - Any workload that is heavy on writes to the database (since Apache Cassandra is optimized for writes).

#### **When not to use a relational database?**
- **Need to be able to store different data type formats**: NoSQL was also created to handle different data configurations: structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data. JSON, XML documents can all be handled easily with NoSQL.
- **Large amounts of data**: Relational Databases are not distributed databases and because of this they can only scale vertically by adding more storage in the machine itself. NoSQL databases were created to be able to be horizontally scalable. The more servers/systems you add to the database the more data that can be hosted with high availability and low latency (fast reads and writes).
- **Need horizontal scalability**: Horizontal scalability is the ability to add more machines or nodes to a system to increase performance and space for data
- **Need high throughput**: While ACID transactions bring benefits they also slow down the process of reading and writing data. If you need very fast reads and writes using a relational database may not suit your needs.
- **Need a flexible schema**: Flexible schema can allow for columns to be added that do not have to be used by every row, saving disk space.
- **Need high availability**: Relational databases have a single point of failure. When that database goes down, a failover to a backup system must happen and takes time.
- NoSQL was built for big data.

#### **When to use a relational database?**
- **When you have a small dataset**: NoSQL databases were made for big datasets not small datasets and while it works it wasn't created for that.
- **When you need ACID Transactions**: If you need a consistent database with ACID transactions, then most NoSQL databases will not be able to serve this need. NoSQL database are eventually consistent and do not provide ACID transactions. However, there are exceptions to it. Some non-relational databases like MongoDB can support ACID transactions.
- **When you need the ability to do JOINS across tables**: NoSQL does not allow the ability to do JOINS. This is not allowed as this will result in full table scans.
- **If you want to be able to do aggregations and analytics**
- **If you have changing business requirements**: Ad-hoc queries are possible but difficult as the data model was done to fix particular queries.
- **If your queries are not available and you need the flexibility**: You need your queries in advance. If those are not available or you will need to be able to have flexibility on how you query your data you might need to stick with a relational database

<script type="text/javascript" src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>
<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({ tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$', '$']]}, messageStyle: "none" });
</script>