# **Data Engineering Nanodegree**
## **1. Data Modeling**
### **1.2 Relational Data Models**
---
#### **Basic Concepts**
- Databases: set of related data and the way it is organize.
- Database Management System: computer software that allows users to interact with one or more databases and provides access to all of the data contained in the database.
- "Database" is often used to refer to both a database and the DBMS used to manipulate it.

#### **Importance of Relational Databases**
- **Standardization of data model**: Once your data is transformed into the rows and columns format, your data is standardized and you can query it with SQL.
- **Flexibility in adding and altering tables**: Relational databases gives you flexibility to add tables, alter tables, add and remove data.
- **Data Integrity**: Data Integrity is the backbone of using a relational database.
- **Structured Query Language (SQL)**: A standard language can be used to access the data with a predefined language.
- **Simplicity**: Data is systematically stored and modeled in tabular format.
- **Intuitive Organization**: The spreadsheet format is intuitive to data modeling in relational databases.

#### **OLAP vs OLTP**
- **Online Analytical Processing (OLAP)**: databases optimized for these workloads allow for complex analytical and ad hoc queries, including aggregations. These type of databases are optimized for reads.
- **Online Transactional Processing (OLTP)**: databases optimized for these workloads allow for less complex queries in large volume. The types of queries for these databases are read, insert, update, and delete.
- **Key difference**: analytics (A) vs transactions (T).
  - If you want to get the price of a shoe then you are using OLTP.
  - If you want to know the total stock of shoes a particular store sold, then this requires using OLAP.

#### **Structuring the Database**
- **Normalization**: to reduce data redundancy and increase data integrity
- **Denormalization**: must be done in read heavy workloads to increase performance.

#### **Normalization**
- Objectives of Normal Form:
  - To free the database from unwanted insertions, updates, and deletion dependencies.
  - To reduce the need for refactoring the database as new types of data are introduced.
  - To make the relational model more informative to users.
  - To make the database neutral to the query statistics.

#### **Normal Forms**
- How to reach First Normal Form (1NF)?
  - Atomic values: each cell contains unique and single values
  - Be able to add data without altering tables
  - Separate different relations into different tables
  - Keep relationships between tables together with foreign keys

- Second Normal Form (2NF):
  - Have reached 1NF
  - All columns in the table must rely on the Primary Key

- Third Normal Form (3NF):
  - Must be in 2nd Normal Form
  - No transitive dependencies
  - Remember, transitive dependencies you are trying to maintain is that to get from A-> C, you want to avoid going through B.
  - When to use 3NF? When you want to update data, we want to be able to do in just 1 place.

#### **Normalization x Denormalization**:
- Normalization is about trying to increase data integrity by reducing the number of copies of the data. Data that needs to be added or updated will be done in as few places as possible.
- Denormalization is trying to increase performance by reducing the number of joins between tables (as joins can be slow). Data integrity will take a bit of a potential hit, as there will be more copies of the data (to reduce JOINS).

#### **Fact and Dimension Tables**
- Fact tables: consists of the measurements, metrics or facts of a business process.
- Dimension tables: a structure that categorizes facts and measurements in order to answer business questions. Dimensions are people, products, place and time.
- Two of the most popular (due to simplicity) data mart schema for data warehouses are:
  - Star schema
  - Snowflake schema

#### **Star Schema**
- Simplest style of data mart schema
- Consists of one of more fact tables referencing any number of dimensions tables
- Benefits:
  - Denormalized, simplified queries, fast aggregations
- Drawbacks:
  - Issues that come with denormalization
  - Data integrity
  - Decrease query flexiblity
  - Many to many relationships

#### **Snowflake Schema**
- Represented by centralized fact tables which are connected to multiple dimensions.
- Star Schema is a special, simplified case of the snowflake schema. The difference is that it does not allow for one to many relationships while the snowflake does.
- More normalized that star schema. 

<script type="text/javascript" src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>
<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({ tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$', '$']]}, messageStyle: "none" });
</script>